# Paradata Document


#### Project Overview
I began this project with the idea of using the Shawville Equity newspaper to research the Great Fire of 1906 that occurred in the main core of Shawville, Quebec. Throughout my career, I’ve noticed a common trend of downtown fires occurring in small towns in Canada around the early 1900s. Incorporating my interest in architecture, I wanted to see if I could map the loss of heritage buildings in a downtown core. Using the Equity newspapers, I would begin by identifying the frequency of the word “fire” (and similar words) within the years of 1906-1916. Searching the word “fire” would help me locate articles in the newspaper that included the mention of fires, and from there I would read and identify any mention of buildings lost to fires in Shawville. I would then be able to map the path of the fires, focusing primarily on the Great Fire of 1906.


#### Methods and Research
Knowing I had to use the Shawville Equity newspaper as my main source of research, I realized I had to narrow down the search area, considering the newspaper has records for every year since 1883. I started by simply typing into Google “*Shawville Quebec Great Fire*” and got nothing but one return that seemed promising. From there I was able to discover that the fire occurred in the year 1906. The site also provided plenty of historic images of Shawville, which then gave me an idea. I could use these images in correlation with the data I extracted from the newspapers. But how could I display this gathered information visually? Fortunately Professor Graham gave a suggestion that proved useful- StoryMap. After exploring StoryMap, I realized that the program seemed to be a good option to use for my final project. I could combine both scanned PDFs of the original newspaper with images of the town before and after the fire. 


#### Limitations & Challenges
When I started out with my idea for the final project, I originally thought of focusing on a ten year period of the Shawville Equity from 1906-1916. However, I shortly discovered that this would prove very time constraining considering that the data I would be working with would include 10 years of papers each year containing 12 months worth and roughly 4 newspapers released each month; 480 text files would be A LOT. Instead I changed course and decided to just focus on the years 1906, 1916, and 2006 (100 years after the fire).

When actually attempting the project, I came across several issues which made the project difficult to complete and therefore attain the deserved outcome I wanted. While trying to work with the Shawville Equity dataset, one of my main challenges was the bad OCR. This caused my text files to appear messy and disorganized. I really struggled with cleaning the files in DHBox, the step before I planned to upload them into Lexos, my visualizing tool of choice. I searched through numerous resources and tried several different codes in DHBox. I understood what I needed to do, which was filter out the characters and symbols from the text file, however I wasn’t able to understand what code to use to do this. I felt that I was getting there slowly, VERY SLOWLY and perhaps with more time and assistance, I could have figured it out. Not letting this mishap set me back, I pushed on and produced a word cloud in Lexos. Although my word cloud still had many of the symbols and characters, I still felt that I accomplished a lot by figuring out the “scrubbing” while using stop words and keep words text files to produce a final product. As I was using many of these tools for the first time, I do believe that I made some decisions which may have skewed my results. Using the Online Chart Tool was a breeze though!


#### Reflection
This project taught me a lot about what being a Digital Historian is all about. The course in general also introduced me to many new programs, tools, and technology that I never knew existed on the web. Before entering this class, I thought I had an idea of how the class would operate; I thought we would use the internet to search forms of history. I was right on some level but now I know it stretches far beyond that. More than once I felt like I was navigating the unknown seas of the internet, at night and during a storm. But I can confidently say, I weathered through and came out a (little) more experienced sailor in the end; a long way to go to become captain though. GitHub and DHBox remain my two biggest adversaries, but I definitely know more about them now than I did at the start of the class. 

The idea behind my final project was to provide a visual map of the trail of the Great Shawville Fire of 1906. Using the Shawville newspaper scans and StoryMap, I would document the destruction of each building in the town of Shawville along Main Street. This would allow the reader to make a connection between the information presented in the newspaper and a physical location; making the reader feel as if they were actually witnessing the fire’s path of destruction, even though it occurred over 100 years ago. While I am proud of my idea, I wish I had had a better understanding of how to clean the data. I feel this would have made the process run more smoothly and I could have dedicated more time to producing a complete StoryMap. There are definitely a few quirks that I would have liked to work out because I never like to submit something unless it is 100% perfect and I’ve proof read it several times. But like Professor Graham mentioned, Digital History is about documentation, understanding and evolving; it’s about the process, not always the finished product. 

My proudest accomplishment by far was my website, asharchitecture.ca. During the last month of the course, I really experimented with Plugins and Widgets on my site to “spruce” it up. When I started my Instagram account 2 years ago, I thought of someday starting a Blog to accompany it, but I never got the courage because I feared that it would be too technical and confusing. This class made me realize that although it is a lot of work to keep up, it was easier than I thought and WordPress was very user friendly. 

In keeping a weekly fail log, it allowed me to look back at my own previous work and use it when I got stuck or forgot what I had done weeks before; digital scrap notes. As a person who frequently prefers writing ALL my notes on paper, using GitHub repositories to store fail logs, notes, etc., might start to catch on for me- because GO GREEN! If I could walk away from this class and have gained one thing it would be that *the process is just as important, if not more important than the finished product.*
